# Homework –week2 (No.1)

**Due: 2020-April-9 (1pm before class)**

 

Format: Email report and associated code/commands sent to TA.

 

The goal is to learn how to compare which tool is better. 

You can pick any DNA short read aligner you want to compare with (at least two, can be more).

 

## What is needed in the homework:

1. [Ideally simulation based evaluation of performance] Because you will know what the correct results are, while you normally do not have such knowledge from real data. [You can write your own code to perform such simulation, or you can also use two tools in bedtools to generate the simulated reads for you, http://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/content/bedtools-suite.html, if you try and still do not have much idea, you can discuss with others or contact TA about this step] You should evaluate the performance using the precision and recall you learned in the class.  Or you can just randomly pick few examples manually and perform the comparison.

2. Try to explain why in some cases, the aligner tools fail to give you the correct answer. And examine whether there is a way to get the correct answer by adjusting the input parameters. 

3. Give a final recommendation of the N software/tools you compared and explain why you think in your cases, this one is better. 

4. [optional] It is important that your simulation can capture the potential problem faced by real data, not just optimal/simulated condition.

5. [optional] Try to understand why some cases method A works better, while in other cases the method B works better.  

6. [optional] Try to understand what parameters are important and how the key parameters can affect the precision or recall.

 

References:

1. Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows–Wheeler transform. [Heng Li](javascript:;) [Richard Durbin](javascript:;). *Bioinformatics*, Volume 25, Issue 14, 15 July 2009, Pages 1754–1760

2. A survey of sequence alignment algorithms for next-generation sequencing. Heng Li Nils Homer. Briefings in Bioinformatics, Volume 11, Issue 5, 1 September 2010, Pages 473–483

3. http://massgenomics.org/short-read-aligners

4. http://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html

5. https://omictools.com/read-simulators-category

 

 